Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and
this is the lecture on defining
success in data science.
So, let's talk about success
vs failure in data science.
So, the most positive results
in a data science experiment
is new knowledge is created.
But even better than that, is that
actionable decisions are made off of that
new knowledge, so decisions are made based
on the outcome of the data analysis.
Ideally these decisions,
the new knowledge or
the product from the data
analysis has impact.
And I would define another form of success
that seems less clearly successful but
still is successful none the less,
which is if you determine that the data
cannot inform the decision in question.
So, or
the knowledge that you'd like to gain.
And if that's conclusive then
you know where else to look.
So that is a form of success.
Maybe it's a negative form of success but
it, but is a form of success.
Let's talk about the opposite.
What are ways in which data signs
experiments can really be unsuccessful?
Well, the decisions
are made in the opposite
of the direction of clear evidence.
That's probably the worst output of
a data science experiment, where all
the evidence is clear, and the decisions
are made in the opposite direction.
Another problem is that maybe
the results are equivocal.
So the studies may be underpowered.
Or maybe you didn't measure what
you had hoped to when you, or
what you'd liked to have measured.
So even though you get conclusive results
the measurement is off by a little bit.
So these things can all happen and
lead to a result that neither supports nor
refutes so a set of hypotheses.
Also in this case is the decision
would not be obvious.
Another instance is just
where the uncertainty just
prevents new knowledge from being created.
I would emphasize that a lot of the things
that we're going to talk about: data
science in the ideal versus data science
In real life is covered in week four,
the fourth class of this specialization
called Data Science in Real Life.
So in this lecture,
I'd just like to go over some examples
of when data science was a real success,
and maybe some examples where data
science wasn't so successful.
Well actually I don't think I cover
anywhere it wasn't so successful,
but I cover an instance where
some negative things happened.
I think if anyone were to ask anyone
about defining success in data science,
the first thing that comes to
everyone's mind is Moneyball.
And if you haven't heard of Moneyball, and
I promise as the have some
other examples as well.
But if you haven't heard of Moneyball,
Moneyball was this brilliant novel written
my Michael Lewis on the Oakland A's
baseball team and their manager and
how they started using data science to
help them improve their performance.
And here's this great plot from
538 where it shows the standard
deviations from the average payroll of
the teams versus the win percentage.
So if you look at Oakland,
the clear outlier of this relationship,
it's one standard deviation
below the average payroll.
It is well above what will be expected for
the win percentage for that team.
Now, it's not the best.
Way up in the right is the New York
Yankees or the Red Sox or something,
I think it was the Yankees on the upper
right, that had the highest payroll and
the highest win percentage.
But Oakland was well above what
would be predicted from them
based on using data science
in their organization.
Okay so that's a very famous example, now
if you haven't read that book it's a great
motivating book for
the field of data science.
But I want to cover one of my favorite
examples of a data scientist maybe one of
the earliest examples of a data scientist,
and that was Florence Nightingale.
So you've probably all heard of
Florence Nightingale in her fabulous work
as a nurse, but you may have less likely
have heard of her contributions to
the field of statistics and graphics.
And this is one of her beautiful
graphs that she created here.
She's one of the really early
developers of modern graphs.
And there's a lot written about it.
In some of the books,
like Tufte's books on graphing.
And it's great reading if you want
something interesting to read up on.
But in this particular graph and in
this work, she showed that the soldiers,
the British soldiers in the Crimean war,
were more likely to die from Cholera than
they were to die on the battlefield.
And this was a report that she gave to
the royalty that actually changed policy.
So this is a great example of using data,
creating visualizations in an early
example of data science to impact policy.
And I would say this idea of
using data science to inform
infectious disease prevention is is
very old and has had it's ups and downs.
And so this,
let's talk about one of the downs.
Another one of my heroes is this
person right here, Semmelweis.
Semmelweis was a physician, but
he was also a very astute scientist and
he was concerned about
the rates of infections when
contrasting two clinics in his area for,
two clinics for
pregnant women and he wanted to
figure out why the outcomes were so
much worse for one of the clinics and
he used the data.
And he used a lot of scientific and
critical thinking to figure out well
before the advent of the germ theory
of disease that it was the fact that
the medical students were
operating on the cadavers and
then treating the women and were actually
carrying over some sort of infection.
He called it something with the word
cadaver in it, some sort of cadaverous
infection, because this was before
the germ theory of disease.
So at any rate what's negative about
this I mentioned that this was negative.
What's negative about this was
that in his solution was hand
washing and
what was negative about this was policies
about hand washing weren't executed well
after this research, well after his death.
Even now, there's still a lot of work
being done trying to enforce hand washing
in hospitals to prevent infections.
So his work has this long legacy, and this
long legacy that's still being research.
And unfortunately it was a long time and
a lot of lives lost by virtue
of ignoring what was clear data and
especially, even if this data
wasn't the clearest data,
the data piled up on top of it afterwards.
And so this maybe wasn't the best example
of the, of the successful outcome
of data science experiment despite the
experiment actually being conducted well I
wanted to also talk about another instance
from an alumni from our department.
This physician here named Dorry Segev who
actually also got a masters degree in bio
statistics along the way and
he has several great examples
of using data science to inform
decisions and policy making.
So in one example, and
I would say what he's ultimately,
what his career seems to be shaping up as,
from my outside viewpoint,
is he's applying the field of data
science to transplantation research,
whereas traditional transplantation
research was really all about,
you know, improving technique for example.
He's really working on data bases and
performing a lot of statistics on large
populations of transplant recipients and
donors, etc., and really impacting policy.
So, in essence, he's really moneyballing
transplantation in a lot of ways.
And one really great success
he had was to help get
policies enacted to allow for
HIV positive patients to be
donors just for research purposes,
to understand whether or
not they can be donors to other
HIV potential kidney recipients.
And so this was,
he did some data science work
on estimating the potential pool of HIV
infected deceased organ donors, and
this lead to new legislation, and
here's President Obama signing it.
This is going to allow researchers
to study this phenomenon,
and may in the long run,
save quite a few lives.
I'd say, also here's this,
I put a link here.
Here's this cute documentary created
by Andrew Rizzaro on Dorian and
his wife who's a computer
scientist at the Naval Academy.
And on the problem about,
I'm about to talk about, there's another
really great data science success.
So watch this YouTube documentary,
it's really great.
So, anyway, another thing that they
studied was considering this problem,
so here I have to shades of red,
the first row is a couple.
The left member of the couple,
let's say they're spouses, the left
member of the couple wants to donate a
kidney to the right member of the couple.
And the same thing is true for
the second row.
However, they're not matches,
so they can't be donors.
However, imagine the case that the pair
of them could be donors to the others.
And you could imagine mining a data set
to do this, then you could put everyone
under the knife at the same time and
do the donation, do the donation this way.
So the second spouse gives it to the first
spouse's recipient and vice-versa.
There's nothing that would stop you from
stopping at pairs of kidney donation.
You could for example do three,
where none of the pairs would match up but
if you had three that matched up
in the right way, you could do it.
Well, Dory, well Summer,
his wife who's the computer scientist at
the Naval Academy, wrote the algorithms
that mine the donation data set to find,
and the potential donors,
to find large collections of matches
of pairs of kidney matches
in ways that would work out.
And Dorie and other members of
the transplant teams here at Johns Hopkins
have done extremely large multi-way
simultaneous kidney transplantations.
Many of these were reported
on in the New York Times.
So I think this idea of
moneyballing transplantation.
Is really transforming the field and
it's really,
I have to say it's great to
see one of our alumni even if
we were only a minor part of his
education doing such great work
especially applying bio statistics and
data science in such a profound way.
I want to talk anyway,
this is another example for biostatistics.
An example where the measurement
can't do what you'd hope for.
And this is my friend and
colleague Martin Linquist.
We work in the field of FMRI, and
something that a lot of people want to do
is say that when this area
of the brain activates,
then afterwards this area of
the brain activates, inactivates.
And what Martin basically proved using a
collection of data, science, physics, and
biology, was he showed
that that's not actually
possible with the measurements
that are being collected.
So that's a negative result in a sense
because what everyone wants to do has been
proven can't be done.
However, in a positive sense,
this has shed light on not
wasted a lot of people's time now trying
to do this and it was an important result.
And also people who wanted to do this
have you know continued to try to refine
the technique the way in which
the data was collected to improve it.
So I just want to reiterate this point
that another way in which success can
occur in data science
is if you can demonstrate that you can't
answer the kinds of questions that you
want to with the data that
you have available to you.
And I want to end on a more positive
note that on this idea of impact,
and one of the best ways that a data
science experiment can have impact
as if the product of the data science
experiment is some app that everyone uses.
And I just want to make a plug for
my own class in the other course area
data science specialization that we
teach called Data Products,
developing data products.
In the data products
class you create an app,
a data science app, and sometimes
people tweak them out on Twitter.
If you go to #mydataproduct
you can see some of them.
Here, I took this one from
this one that I liked.
I picked one relatively at random but
I liked it because it had
lots of dowels and inputs.
Where, you know,
this student, Brent, put in,
you know you can put in
a lot of various factors and
get your retirement
savings goal out of it.
So, and any rate,
of course some of the most well-know
examples of data science apps are all
the recommender systems that occur
when we purchase goods from online
retailers and things like that.
So one of the best ways to have
an impact is to create an app.
And we're seeing that so
often now in our lives.
it's hard to even enumerate them all.
I think it's hard to even go through
a day without using a data science app.
Okay, so
in today's lecture we talked a lot about
different ways in which data
science can be successful and
maybe even a few where it can
be a little less successful.
If you want a lot more
discussion about the,
what to do when you're data science
experiment is a little bit foggier.
The week 4 class data science
in real life, will cover that.
However, in this case I hope this gets you
thinking about, for your own data science
experiments, and the ones that you're
managing, what would define success.
Thanks, and I look forward to seeing
you in some of the next lectures.